README.md, before:

# BNDES COVID-19 Emergency Measures Analysis

This project is designed to fetch, preprocess, and analyze data from the Brazilian Development Bank (BNDES) Open Data API, specifically related to emergency COVID-19 measures. The project includes data retrieval, preprocessing for text-based numeric values, and exploratory data analysis.

## Project Structure

- **fetch_data.py**: Fetches data from the BNDES API and loads it into a DataFrame.
- **process_data.py**: Processes the data by converting text-based numeric values into numeric format.
- **test_fetch_data.py**: Contains tests to verify that data retrieval from the API is functioning as expected.
- **bndes_analysis.ipynb**: A Jupyter Notebook that demonstrates data loading, preprocessing, and analysis.

## Setup Instructions
# BNDES Emergency Measures - Production AWS Architecture

This project implements a production-ready system for fetching, processing, and storing BNDES emergency measures data on AWS using serverless technologies.

## Features

- **Automated Data Pipeline**: Daily execution via CloudWatch Events
- **Serverless Architecture**: Lambda with Docker containers in ECR
- **Data Persistence**: Processed data stored in S3 as Parquet files
- **Comprehensive Monitoring**: CloudWatch logs, metrics, alarms, and dashboards
- **Alert System**: SNS notifications for failures and errors
- **Error Handling**: Dead Letter Queue (SQS) for failed executions
- **CI/CD Pipeline**: Automated testing, building, and deployment via GitHub Actions
- **Security**: KMS encryption, least-privilege IAM policies, versioned state
- **Infrastructure as Code**: Complete Terraform configuration

## Architecture Overview

```
┌─────────────┐
│  CloudWatch │
│   Events    │ (Daily trigger at 03:00 UTC)
└──────┬──────┘
       │
       ▼
┌─────────────┐     ┌──────────┐     ┌─────────┐
│   Lambda    │────▶│    S3    │     │   ECR   │
│  Function   │     │  Bucket  │     │   Repo  │
│  (Docker)   │     │(Parquet) │     │         │
└──────┬──────┘     └──────────┘     └─────────┘
       │
       ▼ (failures)
┌─────────────┐
│  SQS DLQ    │
└──────┬──────┘
       │
       ▼
┌─────────────┐     ┌─────────────┐
│ CloudWatch │────▶│    SNS      │
│  + Alarms  │     │ (Email)     │
└─────────────┘     └─────────────┘
```

## Project Structure

```
bndes-emergency-measures/
├── src/                        # Source code
│   ├── app.py                  # Lambda entrypoint with S3 upload
│   ├── fetch_data.py           # BNDES API data fetching
│   └── process_data.py         # Data processing and transformation
├── Dockerfile                  # Docker image for Lambda
├── requirements.txt            # Python dependencies
├── notebooks/
│   └── bndes_analysis.ipynb    # Jupyter notebook for analysis
├── terraform/                  # Infrastructure as Code
│   ├── main.tf                 # Main Terraform configuration (modules)
│   ├── providers.tf            # Provider and backend configuration
│   ├── variables.tf            # Input variables
│   ├── outputs.tf              # Output values
│   └── modules/                # Reusable modules
│       ├── ecr/                # ECR repository
│       ├── lambda/             # Lambda function with DLQ
│       ├── s3/                 # S3 bucket with KMS
│       ├── monitoring/         # CloudWatch + SNS
│       └── schedule/           # CloudWatch Events
├── tests/                      # Unit tests
├── scripts/                    # Utility scripts
│   └── setup-terraform-backend.sh
├── .github/
│   └── workflows/              # GitHub Actions pipelines
│       ├── 01-lint-check.yml
│       ├── 02-unit-tests.yml
│       ├── 03-security-scan.yml
│       ├── 04-docker-build-test.yml
│       ├── 05-terraform-plan.yml
│       └── 06-deploy.yml
└── README.md                   # This file
```

## Quick Start

### Prerequisites
- AWS Account with appropriate permissions
- AWS CLI configured
- Docker installed
- Terraform >= 1.5.0
- Python 3.11
- GitHub account (for CI/CD)

### 1. Set Up Terraform Backend

```bash
chmod +x scripts/setup-terraform-backend.sh
./scripts/setup-terraform-backend.sh
```

### 2. Deploy Infrastructure

```bash
cd terraform
terraform init
terraform plan
terraform apply
```

### 3. Verify Deployment

```bash
terraform output
```

## Configuration

Key configuration variables in `terraform/main.tf`:

| Variable | Default | Description |
|-----------|---------|-------------|
| `aws_region` | `us-east-1` | AWS region |
| `project_name` | `bndes-emergency-measures` | Resource prefix |
| `lambda_timeout` | `900` | Lambda timeout (seconds) |
| `lambda_memory_size` | `1024` | Lambda memory (MB) |
| `alarm_email` | `""` | Email for alerts |
| `log_retention_days` | `30` | CloudWatch logs retention |

## Monitoring

### CloudWatch Dashboard
Access the monitoring dashboard:
```bash
terraform output dashboard_url
```

Or navigate to: `CloudWatch > Dashboards > bndes-emergency-measures-dashboard`

### View Logs
```bash
LOG_GROUP=$(terraform output log_group_name)
aws logs tail $LOG_GROUP --follow
```

### Check Alarms
terraform output
```

## Configuration

Key configuration variables in `terraform/main.tf`:

| Variable | Default | Description |
|-----------|---------|-------------|
| `aws_region` | `us-east-1` | AWS region |
| `project_name` | `bndes-emergency-measures` | Resource prefix |
| `lambda_timeout` | `900` | Lambda timeout (seconds) |
| `lambda_memory_size` | `1024` | Lambda memory (MB) |
| `alarm_email` | `""` | Email for alerts |
| `log_retention_days` | `30` | CloudWatch logs retention |

## Monitoring

### CloudWatch Dashboard
Access the monitoring dashboard:
```bash
aws cloudwatch describe-alarms --alarm-name-prefix bndes-emergency-measures
```

## CI/CD Pipeline

The project includes a complete CI/CD pipeline using GitHub Actions, split into modular workflows:

1. **Lint Check**: Checks code style and quality.
2. **Unit Tests**: Runs pytest with coverage.
3. **Security Scan**: Scans code and dependencies for vulnerabilities.
4. **Docker Build**: Builds and tests the Docker image.
5. **Terraform Plan**: Generates an infrastructure plan (on pull requests).
6. **Deploy**: Applies infrastructure changes (on push to main).

## Cost Estimate

Monthly costs (us-east-1):
- Lambda: ~$0.20
- ECR: ~$0.10
- S3: ~$0.05
- CloudWatch Logs: ~$0.10
- SQS DLQ: ~$0.00
- SNS: ~$0.00 (1000 free emails/month)
- KMS: ~$0.03

**Total: ~$0.48/month**

## Security Features

- KMS encryption for S3 data
- Least-privilege IAM policies
- S3 bucket blocks public access
- No hardcoded credentials
- Lambda environment variables encrypted
- ECR image scanning enabled
- Terraform state versioned and encrypted

## Testing

Run tests locally:
```bash
pytest test_fetch_data.py
```

### Using the Notebook

To run the full analysis, open the Jupyter Notebook:

aws cloudwatch describe-alarms --alarm-name-prefix bndes-emergency-measures
```

## CI/CD Pipeline

The project includes a complete CI/CD pipeline using GitHub Actions, split into modular workflows:

1. **Lint Check**: Checks code style and quality.
2. **Unit Tests**: Runs pytest with coverage.
3. **Security Scan**: Scans code and dependencies for vulnerabilities.
4. **Docker Build**: Builds and tests the Docker image.
5. **Terraform Plan**: Generates an infrastructure plan (on pull requests).
6. **Deploy**: Applies infrastructure changes (on push to main).

## Cost Estimate

Monthly costs (us-east-1):
- Lambda: ~$0.20
- ECR: ~$0.10
- S3: ~$0.05
- CloudWatch Logs: ~$0.10
- SQS DLQ: ~$0.00
- SNS: ~$0.00 (1000 free emails/month)
- KMS: ~$0.03

**Total: ~$0.48/month**

## Security Features

- KMS encryption for S3 data
- Least-privilege IAM policies
- S3 bucket blocks public access
- No hardcoded credentials
- Lambda environment variables encrypted
- ECR image scanning enabled
- Terraform state versioned and encrypted

## Testing

Run tests locally:
```bash
jupyter notebook bndes_analysis.ipynb
```

export PYTHONPATH=$PYTHONPATH:$(pwd)/src
pytest tests/ -v
```

## Data Flow

1. **CloudWatch Events** triggers Lambda daily at 03:00 UTC
2. **Lambda** fetches data from BNDES API
3. **process_data.py** converts text-based numeric values
4. **S3** stores processed data as Parquet files with date partitioning
5. **CloudWatch** logs all operations and monitors metrics
6. **SNS** sends email alerts on failures

## Documentation

- [Terraform AWS Provider](https://registry.terraform.io/providers/hashicorp/aws/latest/docs)
- [AWS Lambda Documentation](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/lambda/)
- [GitHub Actions Documentation](https://docs.github.com/en/actions)

## Troubleshooting

### Lambda Timeout
- Increase `lambda_timeout` in Terraform
- Check `lambda_memory_size`
- Review BNDES API response time

### S3 Permission Errors
- Verify IAM policies
- Check Lambda execution role

### Terraform State Lock
```bash
terraform force-unlock <LOCK_ID>
```

For more troubleshooting tips, see [DEPLOYMENT.md](DEPLOYMENT.md).

## Contributing

1. Fork the repository
2. Create a feature branch (`git checkout -b feature/amazing-feature`)
3. Commit changes (`git commit -m 'Add amazing feature'`)
4. Push to the branch (`git push origin feature/amazing-feature`)
5. Open a Pull Request

## License

MIT License

## Support

For issues and questions:
- Open an issue on GitHub
- Check CloudWatch logs for Lambda errors
- Review Terraform state with `terraform show`

---

**Built with AWS Serverless technologies**

Commit message:

fix: Update README to reflect project focus on BNDES Balance Sheet Analysis

README.md, after:

# BNDES Balance Sheet Analysis

This project is designed to fetch, preprocess, and analyze data from the Brazilian Development Bank (BNDES) Open Data API. This dataset contains the BNDES Balance Sheet, presented in BRGAAP, IFRS, and Prudential Conglomerate standards. The project includes data retrieval, preprocessing for text-based numeric values, and exploratory data analysis.

## Project Structure

- **fetch_data.py**: Fetches data from the BNDES API and loads it into a DataFrame.
- **process_data.py**: Processes the data by converting text-based numeric values into numeric format.
- **test_fetch_data.py**: Contains tests to verify that data retrieval from the API is functioning as expected.
- **bndes_analysis.ipynb**: A Jupyter Notebook that demonstrates data loading, preprocessing, and analysis.

## Setup Instructions
# BNDES Balance Sheet - Production AWS Architecture

This project implements a production-ready system for fetching, processing, and storing BNDES balance sheet data on AWS using serverless technologies.

## Features

- **Automated Data Pipeline**: Daily execution via CloudWatch Events
- **Serverless Architecture**: Lambda with Docker containers in ECR
- **Data Persistence**: Processed data stored in S3 as Parquet files
- **Comprehensive Monitoring**: CloudWatch logs, metrics, alarms, and dashboards
- **Alert System**: SNS notifications for failures and errors
- **Error Handling**: Dead Letter Queue (SQS) for failed executions
- **CI/CD Pipeline**: Automated testing, building, and deployment via GitHub Actions
- **Security**: KMS encryption, least-privilege IAM policies, versioned state
- **Infrastructure as Code**: Complete Terraform configuration

## Architecture Overview

```
┌─────────────┐
│  CloudWatch │
│   Events    │ (Daily trigger at 03:00 UTC)
└──────┬──────┘
       │
       ▼
┌─────────────┐     ┌──────────┐     ┌─────────┐
│   Lambda    │────▶│    S3    │     │   ECR   │
│  Function   │     │  Bucket  │     │   Repo  │
│  (Docker)   │     │(Parquet) │     │         │
└──────┬──────┘     └──────────┘     └─────────┘
       │
       ▼ (failures)
┌─────────────┐
│  SQS DLQ    │
└──────┬──────┘
       │
       ▼
┌─────────────┐     ┌─────────────┐
│ CloudWatch │────▶│    SNS      │
│  + Alarms  │     │ (Email)     │
└─────────────┘     └─────────────┘
```

## Project Structure

```
bndes-emergency-measures/
├── src/                        # Source code
│   ├── app.py                  # Lambda entrypoint with S3 upload
│   ├── fetch_data.py           # BNDES API data fetching
│   └── process_data.py         # Data processing and transformation
├── Dockerfile                  # Docker image for Lambda
├── requirements.txt            # Python dependencies
├── notebooks/
│   └── bndes_analysis.ipynb    # Jupyter notebook for analysis
├── terraform/                  # Infrastructure as Code
│   ├── main.tf                 # Main Terraform configuration (modules)
│   ├── providers.tf            # Provider and backend configuration
│   ├── variables.tf            # Input variables
│   ├── outputs.tf              # Output values
│   └── modules/                # Reusable modules
│       ├── ecr/                # ECR repository
│       ├── lambda/             # Lambda function with DLQ
│       ├── s3/                 # S3 bucket with KMS
│       ├── monitoring/         # CloudWatch + SNS
│       └── schedule/           # CloudWatch Events
├── tests/                      # Unit tests
├── scripts/                    # Utility scripts
│   └── setup-terraform-backend.sh
├── .github/
│   └── workflows/              # GitHub Actions pipelines
│       ├── 01-lint-check.yml
│       ├── 02-unit-tests.yml
│       ├── 03-security-scan.yml
│       ├── 04-docker-build-test.yml
│       ├── 05-terraform-plan.yml
│       └── 06-deploy.yml
└── README.md                   # This file
```

## Quick Start

### Prerequisites
- AWS Account with appropriate permissions
- AWS CLI configured
- Docker installed
- Terraform >= 1.5.0
- Python 3.11
- GitHub account (for CI/CD)

### 1. Set Up Terraform Backend

```bash
chmod +x scripts/setup-terraform-backend.sh
./scripts/setup-terraform-backend.sh
```

### 2. Deploy Infrastructure

```bash
cd terraform
terraform init
terraform plan
terraform apply
```

### 3. Verify Deployment

```bash
terraform output
```

## Configuration

Key configuration variables in `terraform/main.tf`:

| Variable | Default | Description |
|-----------|---------|-------------|
| `aws_region` | `us-east-1` | AWS region |
| `project_name` | `bndes-emergency-measures` | Resource prefix |
| `lambda_timeout` | `900` | Lambda timeout (seconds) |
| `lambda_memory_size` | `1024` | Lambda memory (MB) |
| `alarm_email` | `""` | Email for alerts |
| `log_retention_days` | `30` | CloudWatch logs retention |

## Monitoring

### CloudWatch Dashboard
Access the monitoring dashboard:
```bash
terraform output dashboard_url
```

Or navigate to: `CloudWatch > Dashboards > bndes-emergency-measures-dashboard`

### View Logs
```bash
LOG_GROUP=$(terraform output log_group_name)
aws logs tail $LOG_GROUP --follow
```

### Check Alarms
terraform output
```

## Configuration

Key configuration variables in `terraform/main.tf`:

| Variable | Default | Description |
|-----------|---------|-------------|
| `aws_region` | `us-east-1` | AWS region |
| `project_name` | `bndes-emergency-measures` | Resource prefix |
| `lambda_timeout` | `900` | Lambda timeout (seconds) |
| `lambda_memory_size` | `1024` | Lambda memory (MB) |
| `alarm_email` | `""` | Email for alerts |
| `log_retention_days` | `30` | CloudWatch logs retention |

## Monitoring

### CloudWatch Dashboard
Access the monitoring dashboard:
```bash
aws cloudwatch describe-alarms --alarm-name-prefix bndes-emergency-measures
```

## CI/CD Pipeline

The project includes a complete CI/CD pipeline using GitHub Actions, split into modular workflows:

1. **Lint Check**: Checks code style and quality.
2. **Unit Tests**: Runs pytest with coverage.
3. **Security Scan**: Scans code and dependencies for vulnerabilities.
4. **Docker Build**: Builds and tests the Docker image.
5. **Terraform Plan**: Generates an infrastructure plan (on pull requests).
6. **Deploy**: Applies infrastructure changes (on push to main).

## Cost Estimate

Monthly costs (us-east-1):
- Lambda: ~$0.20
- ECR: ~$0.10
- S3: ~$0.05
- CloudWatch Logs: ~$0.10
- SQS DLQ: ~$0.00
- SNS: ~$0.00 (1000 free emails/month)
- KMS: ~$0.03

**Total: ~$0.48/month**

## Security Features

- KMS encryption for S3 data
- Least-privilege IAM policies
- S3 bucket blocks public access
- No hardcoded credentials
- Lambda environment variables encrypted
- ECR image scanning enabled
- Terraform state versioned and encrypted

## Testing

Run tests locally:
```bash
pytest test_fetch_data.py
```

### Using the Notebook

To run the full analysis, open the Jupyter Notebook:

aws cloudwatch describe-alarms --alarm-name-prefix bndes-emergency-measures
```

## CI/CD Pipeline

The project includes a complete CI/CD pipeline using GitHub Actions, split into modular workflows:

1. **Lint Check**: Checks code style and quality.
2. **Unit Tests**: Runs pytest with coverage.
3. **Security Scan**: Scans code and dependencies for vulnerabilities.
4. **Docker Build**: Builds and tests the Docker image.
5. **Terraform Plan**: Generates an infrastructure plan (on pull requests).
6. **Deploy**: Applies infrastructure changes (on push to main).

## Cost Estimate

Monthly costs (us-east-1):
- Lambda: ~$0.20
- ECR: ~$0.10
- S3: ~$0.05
- CloudWatch Logs: ~$0.10
- SQS DLQ: ~$0.00
- SNS: ~$0.00 (1000 free emails/month)
- KMS: ~$0.03

**Total: ~$0.48/month**

## Security Features

- KMS encryption for S3 data
- Least-privilege IAM policies
- S3 bucket blocks public access
- No hardcoded credentials
- Lambda environment variables encrypted
- ECR image scanning enabled
- Terraform state versioned and encrypted

## Testing

Run tests locally:
```bash
jupyter notebook bndes_analysis.ipynb
```

export PYTHONPATH=$PYTHONPATH:$(pwd)/src
pytest tests/ -v
```

## Data Flow

1. **CloudWatch Events** triggers Lambda daily at 03:00 UTC
2. **Lambda** fetches data from BNDES API
3. **process_data.py** converts text-based numeric values
4. **S3** stores processed data as Parquet files with date partitioning
5. **CloudWatch** logs all operations and monitors metrics
6. **SNS** sends email alerts on failures

## Documentation

- [Terraform AWS Provider](https://registry.terraform.io/providers/hashicorp/aws/latest/docs)
- [AWS Lambda Documentation](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/lambda/)
- [GitHub Actions Documentation](https://docs.github.com/en/actions)

## Troubleshooting

### Lambda Timeout
- Increase `lambda_timeout` in Terraform
- Check `lambda_memory_size`
- Review BNDES API response time

### S3 Permission Errors
- Verify IAM policies
- Check Lambda execution role

### Terraform State Lock
```bash
terraform force-unlock <LOCK_ID>
```

For more troubleshooting tips, see [DEPLOYMENT.md](DEPLOYMENT.md).

## Contributing

1. Fork the repository
2. Create a feature branch (`git checkout -b feature/amazing-feature`)
3. Commit changes (`git commit -m 'Add amazing feature'`)
4. Push to the branch (`git push origin feature/amazing-feature`)
5. Open a Pull Request

## License

MIT License

## Support

For issues and questions:
- Open an issue on GitHub
- Check CloudWatch logs for Lambda errors
- Review Terraform state with `terraform show`

---

**Built with AWS Serverless technologies**
